>> Hello.
I'm Georgia Shakti-Hill.
And I'd like to
welcome you to "Living
in Balance on Shakti-Hill."
Our program today is
going to teach you
what your role could be in
helping to fight world hunger.
Come join us, "Living in
Balance on Shakti-Hill."
[THEME MUSIC]
Oh, fighting world hunger--
what a major project.
It is something
that we're always
hearing on the news
there is a need for.
There is a wonderful
organization
that is local, that has their
international headquarters
right here in Southwest Florida.
And I did have the
opportunity of going on a tour
just recently, and
looking at the facility.
And it was wonderful to be
educated in how we might
help in fighting world hunger.
And I'd like you to meet
the executive director.
We're so pleased to
have Dr. Price with us.
Welcome.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> Yes.
Well, it is exciting.
When I met with your
developmental director, Mike
Sullivan, he said,
did you know that this
is the international
headquarters for ECHO?
Now, what is ECHO?
What does that stand for?
>> It stands for Educational
Concern for Hunger
Organization.
And we give free
technical assistance
to any organization
or individual
working with peasant farmers
in underdeveloped countries.
Our specialty is
helping people grow food
under difficult conditions.
>> Yes.
And here, some people think
that the area that we're in
does have difficult
conditions because it's
so hot in the summertime.
[LAUGHS]
>> It is a difficult area.
>> But you do have this
incredible place that you have
shown, I just visited, in
the middle of the heat,
and our 90-degree
weather day after day.
And we're in a lush environment.
Are we not?
>> When I came--
moved to Florida 17
years ago, I thought
it was coming to
the Garden of Eden.
It was a little bit
of a surprise at first
because I was trying to
grow what we grew in Ohio.
And I thought, well,
nothing will grow here.
But once you grow
plants that God created
for this kind of a climate--
we have some 400 kinds of
plants we grow at ECHO,
that will thrive right here.
>> Yes.
And it really is
interesting because there
are the variety of
fruits-- and you
have this wonderful
area that you have
that you're so proud of.
200 varieties of--
>> It's 200 varieties of
tropical and subtropical fruits
there, grown in close spacing
so that we can get a lot
of varieties in a small area.
>> And you did bring one of the
fruits that [LAUGHS] we have
with us.
>> Don't you know that one?
>> Yes, the star
fruit, the famous one.
>> It's the carambola
or star fruit.
>> Right.
>> 17 years ago, those
were pretty sour.
You could buy them for a dime a
piece in the local supermarket.
But they weren't
hardly worth eating.
Now, they have much
improved sweet varieties.
And when they were first
hitting the market,
those would-- you could
get maybe $4 or $5
for one of those.
>> Yes.
>> Even now, they're probably
over $1 in the markets up
north.
But you can grow right in
your own backyards here.
>> Yes.
I have friends that do.
And they are sweet now.
They did have a reputation
for only being pretty before.
>> Yes.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> So that is our
carambola, our star fruit.
Right.
And, actually, there are
the variety of bananas.
And you have them from
all over the world,
the different like varieties
of bananas, and many of those,
too.
>> We have, I think, it's 33
different kinds of banana.
I never even knew there were
more than one or two kinds,
before I came down here.
>> Well, I'd asked you
about your background.
And you said that your people in
Ohio, there were some farmers.
There was a little bit of
farming in your background?
>> I actually grew
up on the farm that
my great-great-great-grandfather
cleared out of the wilderness.
So agriculture has been in
my background from day one.
>> Yes, in Southern Ohio.
>> Southern Ohio.
>> Yes, where I said also I
have family that goes back years
that were farmers down
in that area, too.
So you and I took a nice
little walk through,
and you showed me
some of the fruit.
And there were very
varied varieties.
I mean, things that I
had not seen before.
>> Oh, when I used to--
when I would think
of fruit, I would
think of apples and
pears and cherries.
I think of Adam and Eve in
the garden probably eating
those fruits.
Now, if I realize, they may have
had grumichamas, imbes, wampis,
soursops, atemoyas, canistels,
rambutans, pulasans--
on and on, so many
wonderful kinds of fruit.
>> Yes.
>> That's been one of the
great joys of moving to Florida
and growing these.
>> Well, I would think so.
But what you've done is you've
set up different areas here.
There is a rain forest
clearing garden, for example.
>> That's where we grow plants
that can handle huge rainfalls,
and the heat and humidity
that go with them.
Instead of 50 inches that
we would get in Florida,
rain forest might
have 200, 400 inches.
But there are plants
that will grow there.
>> Yes.
And that's really the
whole trick to this,
is just knowing--
so we shouldn't
have people starving
if they knew what they
could do, is basically what
we're looking at?
>> As long as there's some
water and a reasonable amount
of heat, there are food
plants that will grow there.
>> And, also, you
showed us-- and this,
I asked you about this
because we have a photo.
It's a little hard to see.
It's called rooftop gardening.
But here was-- you had
some plants growing,
and then underneath it were
all these aluminum cans.
And I'm looking at that.
[LAUGHTER]
And I'm like, OK, now who's
recycling under this tree?
Tell us about that.
>> Well, as I mentioned, our
specialty is growing food under
difficult conditions.
Well, a cement slab
is about as difficult
as a condition can get.
So we've worked for
several years on methods,
very lightweight and
inexpensive methods,
to be able to
garden on rooftops.
And as we got the beds
shallower and shallower,
people would say,
well, I didn't think
you could grow corn in three
inches of soil, and so forth.
So we thought, let's just
see how far we can push it.
So that bed has about an eighth
of an inch sheet of polyester.
And then we piled cola
cans on top of it,
and we keep it continually moist
with the fertilizer solution.
We can't grow corn
on it, but we're
doing a very nice okra, which
is a big plant like this.
And peppers and herbs
do very well on it.
But it's more educational
than anything else.
But it does work.
>> But that's one of the
purposes of your farm.
And that's what we
call it, a farm.
>> Yes.
>> Because you do also have a
nice variety of animals there.
We visited with
your animals, too.
>> Yes.
We have those
because, as I said,
our specialty is helping
people in third world countries
on small farms.
And the interns that
come through ECHO
need to-- even though
our specialty is plants,
they need to know
about all of the things
that a small farmer
will deal with.
And so we have a kind
of hair sheep, which
is a sheep that loses its wool.
It just falls off.
That's better for the
tropics because you
don't have to learn all the
things about shearing them.
And in the heat,
it's a lot better
not having that wool on there.
So it's a meat sheep.
We have nubian goats for milk.
At our conference
this fall, we're
going to have a local lady teach
about how to make cheese out
of the goat's milk.
I've tasted it.
It's really wonderful.
>> Well, I think our
feta cheese-- well,
a lot of the Greek cheeses
are from goat milk.
>> Yes.
And then we have tilapia fish.
That would be the fish that
Christ's disciples probably
caught in the Sea of
Galilee, and bees.
>> Well, what I liked about
this-- and as we walk through,
first of all, you took us to
this little section that had
the chickens.
And the chickens
were being rotated.
[LAUGHS] And so it was a
combination of the chickens
and a rotational
system with the plants.
Because the idea is that
the chickens will fertilize.
And then, as you
rotate them, you
can plant, then, where
the chickens had been.
Is that not the concept?
>> Yes.
We have three parts.
Two parts always have
vegetables growing on them.
The other one has the chickens.
And they're eating the
insects from the previous--
from the vegetables that used
to be growing in that part--
eating the insect
eggs, scratching up
the weeds as the
seeds germinate,
and putting a little fertilizer
spread around all over.
Then, at the
appropriate time, we'll
move the chickens into a garden
that's just finished, and then
plant this in the garden.
And then, just try to rotate.
>> So not only do they
fertilize, but they also, then,
control the insects--
>> And the weeds.
>> --and the weeds.
Oh, how perfect.
Yeah.
But one doesn't think about
it like-- well, you do.
[LAUGHS] That's the
educational part.
Because I hadn't
thought about that
process until we walked
through on the tour.
And we also saw that, as you
mentioned, there are ducks.
There are the tilapia fish.
And you have combined
them together
in a kind of a harmony, also.
>> That's very common
in Southeast Asia,
where they will use ducks
on the water and housed over
the water.
You want all the manure
to fall into the pond.
Then the tilapia
fish can live off
of the microorganisms that
grow off of this manure.
They have a thing called
gill rakers, so they can--
they don't have to
eat particles of food.
They can eat off of
the microorganisms.
>> And the tilapia, again, are
the fish that we do think are
the fish from the last supper.
Was that--
>> That's quite possible.
Certainly, they would have
been in the Sea of Galilee.
>> Ah, OK.
So there's a little sacred
aspect to it there, too.
Now, the work that
you have done,
you feel-- and you and
I talked about this.
So many of the people who
come and share with us
talk about how good
they feel about the work
that they have been
able to accomplish.
Everything in their life has
brought them up to this point.
So you are serving well, and
you're feeling good about--
[LAUGHS]
>> I can identify with that.
When I was finishing my
page in biochemistry,
I began thinking there ought to
be a more practical way to use
science to help the poor.
I was working on some rather
obscure research topics.
And it was about
a 10-year odyssey.
And I always felt I was
on the way somewhere else.
But when I moved down here 17
years ago, from that point on,
I've just felt this is
where I was supposed to be,
and hopefully, will be here
until the day I retire.
>> Now, you have
brought some plants.
And what was one
of the fun things,
as we walked through here,
is that we were able to--
it's called an edible
landscape nursery.
[LAUGHS]
>> Yes.
>> So you nibble as you go.
Now, what have you
brought us today
that you can show us
and share with us here?
>> OK.
This tree, it's
actually a shrub.
They'll get about
eight feet tall.
It's called chia.
It probably would have
been eaten by the Aztecs
in Central America.
It grows very well
here in Florida
because it resists both the
heat and humidity and rain
of the summer, and the huge
droughts that we can have here
sometimes.
And you cook the
leaves like a spinach.
You have to cook
them about 10 minutes
to get rid of a toxic substance,
and it's just very nice.
Coming out of the
North, people think
a garden is something you
have to plant every year.
It was a eye opener
to realize you can
have perennial vegetables here.
You plant one of these, you'll
eat off of it for 10 years.
>> Well, I was kind
of interested in this.
And you had given me
a huge leaf from here.
But you did warn me to boil it
for 10 minutes first because
of the toxicity.
But this would be, then,
a green that I could have.
And if I liked the
taste, this would
be as in lieu of like, a spinach
or any kind of the greens
that we eat--
collards or whatever.
>> Most greens taste like
what you put on them.
If you put vinegar
on our greens,
this will taste like vinegar.
>> Yeah.
It's so good for your
health and things, too.
>> Oh, this one is
very high in nutrition.
The other one is the
Moringa tree, from India.
It's called Mother's Best
Friend in the Philippines,
where they've tried it.
You pull off these
little leaflets
and make a puree out
of them for babies.
In Africa, there's
a place we just
heard of where they're
drying the leaves,
making them into
a little powder,
and then dispensing them, like
a prescription, to mothers
that aren't able to give milk.
And, reportedly, within
a couple of weeks,
they're back to being
able to feed their babies.
>> Wow.
And, you know, one of the
things that one of our doctors
that came on talked about
was if the one thing
that he could help
people improving
their health-- if they would
combine or add to their diet
two cups of greens a day, it
would make all the difference
in their health.
So this is very
important, is it not?
>> Yes, it is.
>> Now, this will be--
>> That is a fruit.
>> Yeah, a passion fruit.
[LAUGHS]
>> Passion fruit, yes.
It doesn't mean what people
think the word implies,
sometimes.
>> [LAUGHS] Oh, OK.
>> In fact, it lowers blood
pressure a little bit.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> But it has a wonderful
tropical flavor.
And people in the tropics
all over, of course, know it.
But here in Florida, probably
most people that could grow it
don't know that it's so good.
>> Oh, OK.
So this will be, then, a
passion fruit, as we go.
I also saw that you'd had a
couple more here that we had.
And we're going to
be talking about them
after we go on break.
>> OK.
So we'll talk more about those.
And also, you brought some
books, and about the people.
Because the people
who are involved,
that's very important for us
to know who are the volunteers
and the students
and the teachers.
So if you will
stay tuned, we will
be right back with more of
ECHO and fighting world hunger.
[THEME MUSIC]
We are talking to
Dr. Martin Price.
And we are talking about ECHO,
the organization whose purpose
is to fight world hunger.
And one of the
ways is that people
need to be trained
in how to irrigate.
And you do have a wonderful pump
[LAUGHS] that I think they say
cost less than $20 to make
or was made of things--
>> It's called a
rope washer pump.
And it's just-- the
important thing is the people
that we deal with not
only couldn't afford
to buy a commercial pump.
But if it broke, they
wouldn't know how to fix it.
And this is so
simple, it's made out
of nothing except PVC pipe,
rope, and some old tires,
and one little piece of wood.
>> That's amazing.
It really is.
And then you also
demonstrated another pump
that you-- that's
a hand pump, too.
>> And that one is developed
by a volunteer of ECHO's, up
in Sarasota, that you just put
a-- it's composed of PVC pipe
and a marble.
I believe those are the
only components in it.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> But it really pumps well.
>> Yes.
So it's really a matter,
again, of educating us
on how we can help,
and then also--
and educating the people.
And that's what's the fun
process of the way you
bring the interns in.
Now, tell us about the
educational aspect.
Besides the tours, that the
local people and the visiting
people can go on, what is the
student aspect and interns?
>> OK.
We have interns and we have
people that come to study.
The interns is a paid position.
These are college graduates with
a strong Christian commitment
that are thinking
strongly of becoming
missionaries and wanting to
work in the area of agriculture.
And they work for us
for a year in Florida.
And then we send them to
Haiti, where they actually
practice what we've been
teaching them in a third world
setting.
>> Yes.
>> Then, students come.
Sometimes they're
actually undergraduates
coming for credit or it
might be a missionary.
Right now we have
a British girl who
was a missionary in
Kenya for a year.
And now she's over
here, studying.
And, for the first
time this year,
we have two interns who are
actually from Africa-- one
a white African from Zimbabwe,
and the other a black African
from Congo.
>> Yes.
We met the English girl and
the gentleman from Zimbabwe,
and talked about them.
And she talked about
her experience in Haiti.
And that's part of that
program, three months in Haiti,
which must be, as you
and I had talked about,
an incredible culture shock.
>> Yes.
Because you can
read about poverty.
But when you begin
making friends
and then they come to you and
say, would you give me $2,
and you realize it might
be almost the life or death
situation because they need
this drug or something--
and yet they don't want us
to interfere with the culture
and get a dependency created.
So that you can just
see them agonizing
through these decisions.
>> Yeah.
>> And we can't tell them
what the right answer is.
Yeah.
The young man from Zimbabwe,
he said that they also
had this diversity as far
as income and the people
who were destitute.
And he hoped to work in his
country, in his own country,
but in Africa, for sure.
So they will learn
here, and then they
will go back to their--
>> That's the whole idea.
It kind of breaks our
heart, continually.
We'll get really bonded to
these people for a year or so,
and then we say goodbye.
Every two months, we're saying
goodbye to another intern.
>> [LAUGHS] And you
also have volunteers.
And that's a wonderful
aspect of the program.
And those are people who
come in and give, I think,
they said 12,000 hours
a year or something.
>> 12,000 volunteer hours,
including one volunteer,
a 73-year-old fellow from West
Virginia who is volunteering
full time in Kenya on
an agricultural project.
And all the others are
here in this country.
>> Now, we did see, also, one of
our favorite people, Kay Kood.
And she is a person who is
there teaching the herbs,
and about the herb
gardening and so forth.
>> She's been an incredible
addition to our--
>> To the staff.
Yeah.
>> --to our staff there--
gives workshops on herbs
for the public, as well as
training our own students
in depth.
>> Yes.
And we talked about
some of the plants.
But you also had two more here.
Now, this was one
that you had brought.
Tell us about this one.
>> OK.
All of these plants
come from what
we call our edible landscape
workshop, our nursery.
There's nothing more
frustrating than going
to the botanic garden and
seeing all these plants you'd
like to have, but there's
no way to get them.
So this is katuk.
It comes from Borneo.
It's an edible hedge
there, very nutritious,
and tastes about like a
green pea, if you eat it raw.
So it's wonderful, and
they'll thrive right
through the summer.
>> And you also have a
philodendron that has
an edible--
the one philodendron
that has edible--
>> This is the only philodendron
that is edible, here.
It's called monstera.
It has a very peculiar
looking fruit.
It looks maybe like a
cross between a pine cone
and an ear of corn.
And then, when it gets ripe, you
flake off little white segments
inside.
And it's just-- you can't
describe what it's like,
but it's a wonderful fruit.
>> I've tasted that,
because Kay has brought it,
which is wonderful.
And she shared it
with us before.
Now, one of the things you
also have there is a bookstore.
Again, you are educating people,
and the famous ECHO Seeds
can be purchased there.
But there are lots of
really fascinating books
that are available.
>> Yes.
We stock books for the
tourists that come through
and the local people
that come through related
to gardening in Florida.
But also, books for
people in our network.
We have a book on
basic camel keeping.
>> You brought that one.
[LAUGHTER]
So not everyone needs to
know about camels, but--
[LAUGHS]
>> We have two audiences,
and one audience does.
[LAUGHS]
>> Yes.
Also, we have-- and you said
this was one of your favorites,
too, is "The Green Pharmacy."
And this is by James Duke.
And this is really how
one heals through food.
>> He was head of
the USDA Department
of Agriculture's work
on medicinal plants.
And now he's retired, and
he's doing more writing.
He's quite knowledgeable on all
the medicinal uses of plants.
>> And it's really interesting
how one can blend modern
medicine and the ancient
ways that have been used
for centuries using the herbs
and the greens and so forth.
And now, scientifically
we're proving how--
>> We're finding why.
Yes.
>> [LAUGHS] Yes.
It's really kind of wonderful.
You have a beautiful
new building that--
>> Oh, thank you.
>> Oh, yes.
It is going to be
just delightful.
>> With a Florida surround
style porch of the old Florida
houses.
>> Yes.
And it is a result, you said, of
the generosity of three people.
>> Yeah.
Primarily one
person and a couple
other individuals gave
major gifts so every dime
that contributors give to our
ministry has gone to ministry.
It hasn't gone to
build that building.
>> And I asked you
about your funding.
And you said that
you really do receive
from-- its non-denominational,
but tell us
about how ECHO is funded.
>> About 60% of our money
comes from individuals all over
the USA and Canada.
And the rest come
from a big assortment
of churches and civic
clubs, and a few companies.
>> So the churches, when
they have a missionary fund,
then you might be
the recipient from--
>> We might be.
>> --the missionary fund.
>> Yes.
>> OK.
You've been doing
this for 17 years.
Tell us about how it's
impacted on your life
and the lives of other people.
What is the essence of this
sharing that you have done?
What has happened?
And is there good news
about world hunger?
>> Yes.
When I get a report like when
talking about them moringa
leaves and women that
weren't able to give milk
for their children,
and now they are,
that project resulted
from information
we had sent to a missionary
with the Church World Service.
>> We have a courtesy, if
you'd like to stay tuned,
of how you can be in touch
with Dr. Martin and ECHO.
And you might want to
write a little note,
come and visit or
perhaps make a donation.
So, if you will stay tuned,
we will be right back.
[THEME MUSIC]
We also wanted to thank
Bush Entertainment
for the additional
footage that was
supplied of the tour of ECHO.
And one of the things Dr. Price
and I were just talking about
was that everything
there is organic.
And, of course, the
farming is organic.
And you have all
sorts of recipes
for pesticides and fungicides.
And you have a website
that people can visit.
>> We have several hundred
pages of technical information
on our website.
If they search for ECHO in
Fort Myers, they'll probably--
probably be the best
way, rather than trying
to memorize the address.
>> So they can find you in
any search engine, probably.
>> Yes.
>> Well, we really want to
thank you for what you are doing
and the gifts that
you are sharing.
And there is no higher
purpose, really,
than to help the people in
the third world countries
to help themselves.
And I think that's
really what you're
doing in the educating
and the training
that you're accomplishing.
>> We feel very fortunate to
be able to make a difference.
>> Yes.
And we feel, too, that
if people are educated
in how they can
help and how they
can help with the environment,
by coming on the tours
and so forth, then they can
also be better citizens.
So, thank you.
>> And thank you for having me.
>> And we want to thank
you for joining us today,
"Living in Balance
on Shakti-Hill,"
and the visit we
have taken to ECHO.
Until next time, may you be
well, happy, and peaceful.
Bye-bye.
[THEME MUSIC]